.. CcpNmr ChemBuild

======================
About CcpNmr ChemBuild
======================

CcpNmr ChemBuild is a graphical tool to construct chemical compound definitions for
NMR. While there are many chemical structure drawing packages available ChemBuild was
especially created to handle concepts like protonation variants and magnetic
equivalence which are required for NMR resonance assignment. Several different
chemical file formats are supported, including PDB, .mol and .mol2, but ChemBuild is
special in its ability read and write CCPN chemical component XML files, which store
NMR-aware information.

**Development**

CcpNmr ChemBuild was written by Tim Stevens using Python and PySide, the Python
bindings to Qt. ChemBuild is the first of the 'Next Generation' of CCPN applications
that use a Qt rather than Tk based graphical interface.

**Relationship to Other CCPN Applications**

CcpNmr ChemBuild does not require any of the other CCPN components to be installed for
most of its operation. However, a proper CCPN installation (which incluses the Python
API) is required for importing and exporting CCPN ChemComp.xml files; the residue and
compound templates used in CcpNmr Analysis and CcpNmr FormatConverter. For ChemBuild
to use an existing CCPN installation the PYTHONPATH environment variable must be set
appropriately.

Limitations and Future Features
===============================

In its present incarnation ChemBuild pretty much does what you instruct it to. There
is a degree of automation, especially with regards to defining variant compound forms
and magnetic equivalence. However, the system is not guaranteed to create only sane
chemistry, e.g the are no proper aromaticity or R/S chirality checks. As development
continues this situation will improve, but for now it is up to the user to make sure
that compounds make sense.

The atom naming, which is important for NMR assignment, is currently only basic.
Automated naming is merely sequential and does not follow any IUPAC conventions.
Nonetheless, the atom names can be set to whatever the user desires, as long as there
is no repetition.

Labelling of chiral centres is only basic at present: R/S can be added to an atom (if
you can work out the IUPAC priorities). In the future local chiralities, similar to
those used by SMILES, will be settable, i.e. by having bonds go 'in' or 'out'.

As time allows the system will be expanded to include chemical sub-graph searches to
add classification keywords to any compound.

Import and export of further chemical file formats will be added, most probably  
InChI and CML, but there is no intention to cover a vast array of formats.

The 'Auto-arrange' feature uses a very simple 2D force field to assist the graphical
display and is not designed represent real conformations of the compounds. Integration
with proper 3D molecular dynamics may occur in the future.

At present ChemBuild will not export ChemCompCoord XML files; the atom coordinate
records used by CCPN templates. This will only be introduced after better 3D molecular
dynamics.


Bug Reporting
=============

The currently available version is a beta test release and bug reports are welcome.
Bug reports should be made via the `CCPNMR mailing list`_ at JISC.

As always, please be clear in your descriptions and give enough detail for the
developers to be able to reproduce the problem from scratch. However, as ChemBuild is
part of the main CCPN release the bug fixing schedule will not necssarily be prompt
and replies to small matters may not be issued. Once CcpNmr Analysis v3.0 is released
ChemBuild will be incorporated into the main CCPN distribution and will share the same
bug reporting mechanism.


.. _`CCPNMR mailing list`:  http://www.ccpn.ac.uk/support

