.. |add-hydrogen|  image:: ../icons/add-hydrogen.png
   :align: bottom

.. |auto-arrange|  image:: ../icons/auto-arrange.png
   :align: bottom

.. |auto-bond|   image:: ../icons/auto-bond.png
   :align: bottom

.. |charge-neg|   image:: ../icons/charge-neg.png
   :align: bottom

.. |charge-none|   image:: ../icons/charge-none.png
   :align: bottom

.. |charge-pos|   image:: ../icons/charge-pos.png
   :align: bottom

.. |checkbox|   image:: ../icons/checkbox.png
   :align: bottom

.. |delete-atom|   image:: ../icons/delete-atom.png
   :align: bottom

.. |delete-bond|   image:: ../icons/delete-bond.png
   :align: bottom

.. |dialog-cancel|  image:: ../icons/dialog-cancel.png
   :align: bottom

.. |dialog-ok|   image:: ../icons/dialog-ok.png
   :align: bottom

.. |edit-copy|   image:: ../icons/edit-copy.png
   :align: bottom

.. |edit-cut|   image:: ../icons/edit-cut.png
   :align: bottom

.. |edit-delete|   image:: ../icons/edit-delete.png
   :align: bottom

.. |edit-paste|   image:: ../icons/edit-paste.png
   :align: bottom

.. |edit-undo|   image:: ../icons/edit-undo.png
   :align: bottom

.. |exchange-hydrogen|  image:: ../icons/exchange-hydrogen.png
   :align: bottom

.. |flip-horizontal|  image:: ../icons/flip-horizontal.png
   :align: bottom

.. |flip-vertical|  image:: ../icons/flip-vertical.png
   :align: bottom

.. |link-next|   image:: ../icons/link-next.png
   :align: bottom

.. |link|   image:: ../icons/link.png
   :align: bottom

.. |link-prev|   image:: ../icons/link-prev.png
   :align: bottom

.. |list-add|   image:: ../icons/list-add.png
   :align: bottom

.. |new|    image:: ../icons/new.png
   :align: bottom

.. |nmr-equivalent|  image:: ../icons/nmr-equivalent.png
   :align: bottom

.. |nmr-no-group|  image:: ../icons/nmr-no-group.png
   :align: bottom

.. |nmr-prochiral|  image:: ../icons/nmr-prochiral.png
   :align: bottom

.. |object-flip-horizontal| image:: ../icons/object-flip-horizontal.png
   :align: bottom

.. |object-flip-vertical| image:: ../icons/object-flip-vertical.png
   :align: bottom

.. |object-rotate-left|  image:: ../icons/object-rotate-left.png
   :align: bottom

.. |object-rotate-right|  image:: ../icons/object-rotate-right.png
   :align: bottom

.. |open|   image:: ../icons/open.png
   :align: bottom

.. |save|   image:: ../icons/save.png
   :align: bottom

.. |stereo-none|   image:: ../icons/stereo-none.png
   :align: bottom

.. |stereo-R|   image:: ../icons/stereo-R.png
   :align: bottom

.. |stereo-S|   image:: ../icons/stereo-S.png
   :align: bottom

.. |toggle-aromatic|  image:: ../icons/toggle-aromatic.png
   :align: bottom

.. |valence-add|   image:: ../icons/valence-add.png
   :align: bottom

.. |valence-remove|  image:: ../icons/valence-remove.png
   :align: bottom

.. |variable-atom|  image:: ../icons/variable-atom.png
   :align: bottom


=====================
Program Documentation
=====================

Main program documentation for CcpNmr ChemBuild, the CCPN chemical structure
creation program. The graphical interface to CcpNmr ChemBuild is constructed of
five main areas, which are described below.

Main Menu
=========

The main menu at the top of the interface reproduces many of the functions that
are available in the toolbars, albeit in a named manner, also handles import
and export of chemical file formats.

File
~~~~

The File menu contains options to load and save native ChemBuild format files.
At present these are .pickle files (Python cPickle dumps of the ChemBuild
internal model). Saving compounds as native ChemBuild files will not result in
any information loss, unlike other formats which may support only a subset of
the data. Other file formats are handled by the Import and Export options.

Import
~~~~~~

These options allow the import of several chemical file formats, including CCPN
XML (ChemComp), Molfile (v2000), Mol2 (Sybyl2) and PDB. For CCPN import, any
separate compound variants (e.g. protonation or polymer link states) will be
loaded. For the other formats only one chemical structure will be loaded (even
if the format supports several).

Export
~~~~~~

The current compound may be exported as various textual chemical file formats
or as a bitmap image. If the compound has several different variant forms, with
slightly different atoms, these will all be saved when using CCPN XML. For the
other formats however only the currently displayed chemical structure version
will be exported.

Edit
~~~~

This menu reproduces some of the compound editing functionality that is also
present in the toolbars. These are described in more detail in the toolbars
section below. It is notable that atom selections can be cut and pasted using
the regular keyboard selections.

View
~~~~

These options control what is seen in the central graphical compound display.
These options are also available in the toolbars and are described fully there.

Top Toolbars
============

The top toolbars provide graphical elements that the user can click to
manipulate the compound and its display. On most platforms the individual
toolbars may be re-arranged within the main window (or pulled off entirely) by
dragging (click, hold & drag) the left hand edge of the toolbar to a new
location. Also, individual toolbars may be toggled on and off entirely by using
the context menu; usually accessed with a right mouse click over a toolbar.

File Toolbar
~~~~~~~~~~~~

The File toolbar contains options to load and save or start a new compound. 

|new| Create a new, blank compound specification, saving the previous one where
      appropriate.

|open| Open an existing compound definition from a ChemBuild file (.pickle),
       any current compound may be saved.

|save| Save the current compound and all of its variant forms to a ChemBuild
       file.

Edit Toolbar
~~~~~~~~~~~~

These options perform potentially large-scale editing or transformation of the
current compound. If the current compound has several variant forms all forms
will be edited in a likewise manner, assuming they contain the appropriate
atoms.

|edit-copy| Copy the currently highlighted (green border) atom selection into a
            memory cache ('clipboard') so that the atoms may be pasted into the
            compound elsewhere.

|edit-cut| Remove the current atom selection (green border) and copy it into a
           memory cache so that it may be pasted elsewhere.

|edit-paste| Paste the currently cached atom selection in to the main compound
             display at the correct cursor location. It should be notated that
             atom names may change from their original values if there are
             duplications.

|edit-undo| Undo the last user operations, restoring the compound to previous states.
            Only the last 10 states can be restored.

|add-hydrogen| Add hydrogen atoms to any unsatisfied valences (black dots). If
               a subset of atoms is selected then only these will be
               considered. Otherwise if nothing is selected all atoms will be
               considered. Hydrogens will be named according to the heavy atom
               that they bond to.

|delete-atom| Delete the currently selected atoms (green border). Note that if
              all the atoms within a given variant form are deleted that whole
              version of the compound will be removed, but the other forms will
              remain.

|delete-bond| Delete the bonds that belong to the currently selected atoms. If
              only one atom is selected then all of its bonds will be deleted.
              If multiple atoms are selected then only the bonds that go
              between selected atoms will be deleted. For example to delete
              only one bond select the two atoms it lies between.

|object-rotate-left| Rotate the current atom selection, or the whole compound
                     if nothing is selected, anticlockwise about its centre.

|object-rotate-right| Rotate the current atom selection, or the whole compound
                      if nothing is selected, clockwise about its centre.

|object-flip-horizontal| Flip the current atom selection, or the whole compound
                         if nothing is selected, horizontally (left becomes
                         right) about its centre.

|object-flip-vertical| Flip the current atom selection, or the whole compound
                       if nothing is selected, vertically (top becomes bottom)
                       about its centre.

|auto-arrange| Automatically arrange the currently selected atoms, or all atoms
               if none are selected, to minimise atom overlap and optimise bond
               length, thus giving a neater graphical display. If the compound
               gets stuck in strange conformations the user may move selected
               atoms to better positions before arranging again.

|auto-bond| Automatically adds bonds to any free valences (black dots) in the
            current atom selection, or the whole compound if nothing is
            selected. Bonds will be added to the closest available pair of
            atoms first and will continue linking pairs until the bond length
            becomes significantly longer than the first bond added. The user
            should be careful to place atoms in appropriate locations prior to
            using this option. In general small rings are avoided and using
            this option several times will add progressively more bonds if
            there are still free sites (although this may make a mess).

View Toolbar
~~~~~~~~~~~~

These options toggle what is displayed in the central graphical view of the
current compound.

|checkbox| *Atom Names*: toggles the display of atom names on and off.

|checkbox| *properties*: toggles the display of atom properties like charge and
           chirality.

|checkbox| *Groups*: toggles the display of NMR specific groups; magnetically
           equivalent atoms and pairs which are stereochemically ambiguous,
           e.g. prochiral methylene hydrogens.

|checkbox| *Show Stats*: toggles a background display of statistics for the
           current compound.

Properties Toolbar
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**Aromatic**

|toggle-aromatic| Sets the selected atoms to be part of an aromatic ring. Note
                   that this function does not yet check the sanity of such a
                   specification. If a selected atom is already aromatic the
                   aromatic ring will be removed. It does not matter which atom
                   or atoms within a given ring are selected.

**Charge**

These options set the unit charge on atoms (+/- electron equivalents). Note
that there is currently no notion of partial or delocalised charges within
ChemBuild.

|charge-pos| Sets the charge of the currently selected atoms to be positive. If
             an atom already has a positive charge the charge is made more
             positive. The appropriate extra valance slots will be added to the
             atom for bonding, e.g. [N+] will have four bonding slots.

|charge-none|  Sets the currently selected atoms to have no charge. This resets
               the valance bonding slots to the uncharged state.

|charge-neg| Sets the charge of the currently selected atoms to be negative. If
             an atom is already negatively charged the charge will become more
             negative. The appropriate number of valance slots will be removed,
             e.g. [O-] will have only one bonding slot.



**Valence**

These options control how many bonds and atom may have. Under most
circumstances the valence bonding slots do not need to be changed from the
starting values, but adjustments are useful for different redox states.

|valence-add| Adds an extra valence bonding slot to the currently selected
              atoms. It is currently up to the user to create chemically sane
              bonding states. This option can be used to create different
              covalently bound redox states, e.g. sulfur has two slots to start
              with but more can be added to make sulfates.

|valence-remove| Remove a valence bonding slot. It is currently up to the user
                 to create chemically sane bonding states. This option is
                 useful for creating different covalently bound oxidation
                 states.

**Chirality**

These options set stereochemistry labels for atom centres. These options will
be expanded in the future.

|stereo-R| Set the currently selected atoms to be an "R" chiral centre. It
           should noted that this is a user label and no checks of IUPAC rules
           are made. Some basic sanity checks are made to ensure that an atom
           has enough bonded neighbours.


|stereo-S| Set the currently selected atoms to be an "S" chiral centre. It
           should noted that this is a user label and no checks of IUPAC rules
           are made. Some basic sanity checks are made to ensure that an atom
           has enough bonded neighbours.

|stereo-none| remove any chirality labels from the selected atoms

**Links**

These options are used to specify how a compound may be linked as a residue
within a (bio)polymer chain (protein, nucleic acid, saccharide). A link is
added to a compound by replacing selected atoms with a special 'link' atom,
which indicates where an adjacent residue is located. Usually the links replace
hydroxyl groups or hydrogen atoms and effectively represent the dehydration
ration that occurs when bio-polymer residues are joined. For example in protein
amino acids links are made that replace the OH of the carboxylate group and a
hydrogen of the amine group. Adding a link will create several different
versions of the current compound, i.e. linked and unlinked variant forms. A
typical bio-polymer residue will have at least four linked forms: "none" for
the free compound, "start" for the first residue in a chain (e.g. N-terminal or
5'), "end" for the last residue in the chain (e.g. C-terminal or 3') and
"middle" for a internal residues. Some residues may also have extra link
states, such as disulfide linked cysteine. Where there is no distinct beginning
or end to a chain, i.e. for oligosaccharides, then generic links may still be
added.

|link-prev| This option replaces the currently selected H or OH to create a
            compound variant that links to the previous residue in the
            bio-polymer chain (following normal conventions, to N-terminus or
            5' end). The unlinked version of the compound will not be removed
            and is still available.

|link-next| This option replaces the currently selected H or OH to create a
            compound variant that links to the next residue in the bio-polymer
            chain (following normal conventions, to C-terminus or 3' end). The
            unlinked version of the compound is available and will not be
            removed.

|link| This option replaces the currently selected H or OH to create a compound
       variant that links to another residue. The link will be named after the
       atoms it connects. E.g. adding a side chain link to cysteine will create
       an "SG" (sulfur gamma) link. The unlinked version of the compound is
       available and will not be removed.

**Exchange**

These options are used to determine whether hydrogen atoms can exchange in
aqueous solution, ether resulting in different protonation forms, depending on
pH, or in atom sites that are not normally observed in NMR.

|variable-atom| The currently selected hydrogen atom is set to be variable; it
                is present in some forms of the compound but not others. This
                results in different protonation states of the compound, i.e.
                with and without the hydrogen, and all forms can be selected
                (unless they have been deliberately deleted). Setting a
                variable hydrogen means the group it is attached to is acidic
                or basic. For example the H in carboxylic acids can be set as
                variable to give anion and neutral forms. Likewise an H in
                -NH3+ can be set as variable to give a neutral form. As far as
                NMR assignment is concerned it is up to the user to choose the
                appropriate form (dependant on pKa and pH), but several forms
                can be present in the same compound description.

|exchange-hydrogen| The currently selected hydrogen is deemed to be in 'fast
                    exchange' with a protic solvent. This setting means that
                    the atom is unlikely to be observed in an NMR experiment.
                    Typical examples include hydrogens in the hydroxyl groups
                    of serine and threonine. The bond to such a hydrogen is
                    displayed as a dashed line in the main display. This option
                    should not be used for a typical protein backbone amide,
                    which may be exchangeable, but is normally observable by
                    NMR.

**NMR Groups**

These options are used to connect several atoms of the same kind (usually
hydrogens or carbons) into a grouping that has a special meaning for NMR
resonance assignment. There are two kinds of groups that may be specified;
magnetically equivalent and non-stereo. The first means that the atoms are
rapidly changing locations so that all atoms in the group see the same magnetic
environment and have the same chemical shift. This is usually the case for the
hydrogens in methyl groups and rotationally symmetric positions in aromatic
rings. The second group, which is often used for prochiral hydrogens, means
that there are two atoms that are stereochemically distinct, but which cannot
initially be distinguished in an NMR experiment (without the aid of structure
calculations).

|nmr-equivalent| The currently selected atoms (of the same kind) are deemed to
                 be magnetically equivalent and have the same chemical shift.
                 This kind of grouping is automatically made for methyls, but
                 may be added for other situations, for example delta positions
                 in the aromatic ring of Phenylalanine have equivalent carbons
                 and equivalent hydrogens under most circumstances (where the
                 ring flips).

|nmr-prochiral| The currently selected pair of atoms, or pair of NMR equivalent
                groups (e.g. methyls) are set to be a non-stereo group. There
                will usually be two distinct chemical shifts, but it will not
                be possible to unambiguously assign the stereochemistry, at
                least initially. This grouping is automatically added for
                methylene groups but may also be added in other situations. For
                example the two methyl groups in Valine; pairing the two gamma
                carbons and the two sets of methyl hydrogens. 

|nmr-no-group| Removes all NMR grouping specification that may be present for
               the selected atoms. Note that whole groups are deleted,
               irrespective of whether all of the group's atoms were selected.

Left Panel
==========

The left hand panel allows chemical elements and compound fragments to be added
to the main display. On most computer platforms this panel can be temporarily
removed by grabbing its right hand edge and dragging it to the left edge of the
main window.

Elements
~~~~~~~~

This section contains a list of the chemical elements commonly found in
covalently bonded compounds. They may be added to the current molecule via
drag-and-drop to the central area: clicking and holding the mouse cursor on an
element, moving to the desired location in the compound and then releasing. The
common 'organic' elements H, C, N, O, P and S may be added to a compound simply
by pressing the corresponding key on the keyboard; the atom will be added at
the current mouse cursor location.

SMILES
~~~~~~

This section allows the user to enter a SMILES string to add a fragment or even
a whole compound to the central display. If there is an existing compound the
atoms added will be in a disconnected fragment.

|dialog-cancel| Clears the contents of the text entry box for the SMILES string

|dialog-ok| Adds the current SMILES string as a new component to the current
            compound (in the centre of the current view). The user will need to
            link to any existing atoms and adjust the geometry.

Compound and Fragment Library
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This cascading tree panel categorises several types of molecular fragment that
may be added to the current compound. Clicking on a category or sub-category
opens lists of compounds and fragments. These may be added to the current
compound by drag-and-drop; the user grabs the compound name and releases it at
the appropriate location in the central compound display (the view may
re-centre). The fragment may need to be further modified or linked to other
atoms. Some fragments, such as *carboxylic acid*, *amine* and the amino acid
*linked template* are pre-constructed with different compound forms. For
example adding a carboxylic acid will give both protonated an unprotonated
forms.

Right Panel
===========

The right hand panel is used to control which version of a compound is
currently displayed and to set various high level attributes such as the
compound's name. On most computer platforms this panel can be temporarily
removed by grabbing its left hand edge and dragging it to the right edge of the
main window.

Variant Forms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The drop-down menus in this section allow the user to switch the compound
display between any of the variant forms of the compound (should any exist).
Different variants are not constructed as separate entities, rather they appear
automatically whenever residue links or variable atoms (i.e. protonation
states) are added to a compound.

**Protonation**

This drop-down menu allows selection of the different protonation forms of a
compound, according to the hydrogen atoms that are present or absent. The
states that are available will be restricted to only the current polymer
linking (see below). For example the N-terminal "start" variant of the amino
acid alanine will have the amide protonation states listed, but not the
carboxylate states; these are only present for the C-terminal "end" variant.
Likewise a "middle" linked alanine will only have one neutral protonation
state.

**Polymer Linking**

This menu selects the current variant of the compound to display according to
the linear bio-polymer linking state, if any such links exist. The available
states are "start", "middle", "end" and "none" to represent the different forms
within a chain and the free, unlinked form. For a compound to have such entries
requires that it has previous ("-1") and next ("+1") residue links defined by
replacing certain atoms compared to the unlinked variant. A given kind of
linking may be combined with other variations, selected in the other menus. For
example "middle" lysine has protonated and unprotonated side chain forms.

**Other links**

This drop-down menu lists any variants caused by the presence of links other
than those for standard linear bio-polymers. These include crosslinks in
proteins, e.g. disulfide linked cysteine, and links in non-linear or branching
chains, e.g. oligosaccharides. For sugar rings these links may be numerous
given that there may be multiple combinations of different links. For example
glucose can have [1,3], [1,4], [1,6], [1,4,6] links etc. 

**Stereochemistry**

This selects stereochemical form of a compound to display, e.g. alpha- or beta-
glucose. Note that this option is little used until the chirality and
stereochemistry capabilities of ChemBuild are improved.


|checkbox| *Default form*: sets whether the currently viewed form of a compound
           is the default version, within the selected bio-polymer linking. For
           example the default version of lysine has a protonated side chain.
           Setting this is useful when exporting to CCPN because the default
           variant will be the one included as standard when building
           molecules. The other forms will still be available but require extra
           settings.


Compound Info
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**Name**

A human readable name for the compound. This is separate from any save file
name, but may be present internally within exported chemical files. 

**Details**

Comments and further description of the compound and its various forms may be
added. These will be preserved in a CCPN export.

**CCPN Code**

This sets the "CcpCode" for a compound, which is the short identifying code for
a particular type of residue. Typically these will be three-letter codes, e.g
"His" or "ATP", but shorter and longer codes are allowed. The purpose of these
residue codes is to provide a short, but meaningful identifier that can be used
when constructing molecules and making NMR resonance assignments. When
exporting to CCPN XML files the code is checked to make sure it is not already
in use, so that there is no confusion with regards to the standard compounds.

**CCPN MolType**

This sets the molecule type for the compound, as used within CCPN projects. For
most small molecules this should remain as "other". However, if the compound
has the correct link specifications for protein, DNA, RNA or carbohydrate
biomolecules it may use a more appropriate type. Setting protein, DNA or RNA
molecule types will allow the compound to be entered in a standard residue
sequence, using its CcpCode (above).


Central Compound Display
========================

The large central area of ChemBuild is where the atoms of a chemical structure
are displayed and assembled. This is where atoms may be moved to create
geometries and connected via bonds. Atoms and compound fragments may be added
by drag-and-drop from the left hand panel, added using a SMILES string or by
using one of the H, C, N, O, P or S keys. Once displayed in the main panel the
atoms may be selected and dragged into position. It should be noted that only
one version of a compound will be displayed at a time. If there are other
variants, for example protonation states, then these maybe accessed using the
drop-down menus in the right-hand panel. For the most part changing the atoms
in one compound variant will affect all of the other variants, as long as the
change is valid. For example when moving an atom it is moved in all the variant
forms it is found within. 

When two atoms with free valence slots are moved close the black valence
circles will turn green. If the atom is then released a new bond will be formed
between the two highlighted valence slots, joining the atoms. This may be
repeated to form double or triple bonds. Alternatively, atoms may be quickly
bonded, if first placed in appropriate positions, by using the *auto bond*
option described above. Also, the *auto arrange* function removes the need to
spend significant time arranging atoms once they are bonded. The properties of
the selected atoms, such as charge and aromaticity, may be set by selecting the
appropriate option from the toolbars or menus. 

The general mouse-driven controls that are used to build a compound are
described below.

Mouse Controls
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**Left-click on an atom**: selects an individual atom.

**Left-click on an atom plus <Control>**: toggles atoms to add to, or remove
from, the current selection.

**Double left-click on an atom**: selects the whole fragment, following bonds
from the current atom.

**Left-click and drag in free space**: draws a green box that is used to select
atoms.

**Left-click and drag on an atom**: moves the currently selected atom or atoms,
following the mouse cursor.

**Double left-click on a bond**: if there are free valence slots, this toggles
the bond type through single, double, triple and quadruple.

**Double left-click on an atom name**: opens a box to edit the name of an atom.

**Middle-click on a bond**: toggles single, double, triple and quadruple bond
types.

**Middle-wheel**: zooms the display, making the atoms appear larger or smaller.

**Middle-click and drag**: if scrollbars are displayed this pans the whole
display area.

**Right-click**: opens a context menu, where many of the options already
described for the toolbars are available.

